Welcome to the Get Fit with Jodell podcast.
I am as usual Jodell and I am so thrilled once again to have with me Dr. Pete and he's
my forever go-to source for all things health and nutrition related.
Dr. Pete has a PhD in biology and he has taught at numerous schools and universities all things
nutrition and women's health specifically and you can learn more about him by visiting
RayPete.com that's R-A-Y-P-E-A-T dot com and you'll be amazed at his science-based articles
and newsletters, all of which we'll talk about later.
He was completely in on the thyroid today.
I'm really excited about talking about the thyroid because I have had thyroid issues
resulting from a toxic mold exposure that I've since gotten better from but I always
love talking about the thyroid for that reason.
I wanted to let the listeners know to stay tuned because at the end, Dr. Pete, I really
want to touch on the foods for the thyroid.
I want to touch on is exercise a do or a don't and lifestyle habits that will amp up the
thyroid.
Also, we actually have two viewer or listener questions related to the thyroid so I hope
to get to those as well.
Thank you once again for joining me.
Let's get started.
Many people speculate, Dr. Pete, that the reasons we have such a thyroid problem now
more than ever is you hear things like because of the chemicals in the food systems or they
say our poor water supply or the fluoride in the water or EMF radiation, all these different
speculations on why we have such a low thyroid problem now but I want your professional opinion.
Why are thyroid problems such a problem these days?
All of those things contribute to the problem but I think the basic most common problem
is the increase of polyunsaturated fats in the diet of vegetable oils, liquid kind basically.
They inhibit the polyunsaturated fatty acids, inhibit the secretion of the hormones from
the gland and it's transported in the blood and it's used in the cell in various ways.
In the 1930s and early 40s, people were estimating that around 40% of the population suffered
from some degree of hypothyroidism as defined by symptoms since the late 19th century symptoms
of hypothyroidism were being described in the medical literature and the low body temperature
tendency to have poor liver function, depression or excitatory brain symptoms, insomnia, high
blood pressure, abnormally low blood pressure, many things, dozens of symptoms were well
identified as mainly caused by hypothyroidism and in the mid-1940s, a drug company synthesized
what they called d-thyroid hormone.
It was a component found in the secretions of the thyroid gland and it's called thyroxine
and it was made synthetically in the 1940s and came on the market as a treatment for
hypothyroidism but along with that marketing of a single chemical came a whole ideology
since this new chemical didn't cure most of the symptoms that were known to identify
hypothyroidism.
Those were decided in the literature, the advertising program of the company selling
the synthetic thyroid, they were written out of the definition of hypothyroidism gradually
over the next 50 years, the only defining characteristic of hypothyroidism came to be
an elevation of the pituitary hormone thyroid stimulating hormone which rises when your
thyroid is low almost always.
And that couldn't be measured in the 1930s and so people went entirely by the symptoms
but with the marketing of thyroxine as the thyroid hormone, they looked over a period
of decades looked for a way to define chemically exactly what the features of hypothyroidism
were so that they could have an exact basis for prescribing the synthetic hormone and
the first test was a blood test for protein bound iodine and that became the prescribing
basis for more than 15 years that people were tested for protein bound iodine in the blood
and if this was low then they could be prescribed the synthetic but in the 1960s it was shown
that this protein bound iodine had absolutely nothing to do with your thyroid function.
It's a very sort of a more or less random event that can go with either high or low thyroid
function and eventually a sensitive test for the pituitary hormone was developed and progressively
other indicators were thrown away and doctors were told to rely only on measurement of TSH
and if it was above 10 of the standard units that was said to be hypothyroidism, if it
was below at first they were saying poor I think it was of the units, that would be hypothyroidism
and in the last two or three years guidelines have been published in major medical journals
advising doctors almost threateningly telling them not to pay any attention to the physiological
signs that traditionally identified hypothyroidism go only by the measurement of TSH and return
to a standard range usually from between 3 and 5 I think is the most common definition
of normal for TSH.
It's so interesting that you mention that because it seems like there are quite a few
people that go to the doctor with classic symptoms of low thyroid function and then
are yet diagnosed as no your thyroid is just fine you're in range so can you talk about
why subclinical hypothyroidism is so prevalent like why aren't they quick to look at the
signs and symptoms and only look at the TSH.
When the company first marketed this synthetic thyroid they said they had tested it on I
think it was two dozen young male medical students for some reason I guess there weren't
many female medical students at the time but the funny thing about thyroid is hypothyroidism
is several times more frequent in women because estrogen messes with the function of all the
functions of the thyroid and so they threw out most of the hypothyroid women from treatment
in the first years and I had obese friends in high school who had been previously diagnosed
as needing a thyroid supplement but they were told by the doctors I heard it from all of
my fat friends that they had discovered that they were not it was not a glandular problem
they had they were just gluttonous people accepted that it was all that they ate too
much not that their glands were being poisoned by something else in the environment.
That's why you hear a doctor saying now eat less move more that's their prescription now
when we see these people with thyroid issues and the women who could stay obese despite
saying that they ate almost nothing doctors doctors were taught that women were basically
lying about how much they ate but someone did the study had women in a locked hospital ward
where there's no possibility of getting extra food and it was found that these women who
said they ate almost nothing but gained weight they were found to be able to maintain their
weight on the diet of 700 calories a day the only way to do that is to be very hypothyroid
but it's still very common for extremely hypothyroid women in particular to be diagnosed as gluttonous
rather than hypothyroid.
Well let's talk about some of the major symptoms that someone would see if they suspect they
might have low thyroid like what are some of the major signs they would notice and see
clearly like with their own body?
When I was 9 or 10 years old I started noticing symptoms in myself that I saw that more girls
had similar symptoms. I didn't see any other boys with migraine headaches and nearsightedness
but these often begin in puberty as a result of low thyroid and I've known girls in their
teens who had just suddenly become nearsighted and when a doctor gave them thyroid in a timely
manner their vision was corrected to normal. So chronic myopia is one of the very frequent
signs of hypothyroidism. Weight loss, inability to gain weight was known more than 100 years
ago 1890 the first publication relating the wasting disease they called it cactexia strumie
prevent caused by loss of the thyroid function. So overweight or underweight both can be caused
by low thyroid. The thyroid hormone is an anabolic hormone that builds protein and tissues and
bones but doctors by getting most things upside down doctors warn that excess thyroid will
cause osteoporosis but animal experiments way back in the 1940s for example on rabbits
they fed them 1% of their food by weight was thyroid plant a gigantic diet equivalent to
oh like 20 grains probably thyroid hormone for a person and they their metabolism went
up so much that they were starved to death no matter how much they ate and so they became
very thin but their bones became abnormally strong and dense showing that the anabolic
effect on the bones it has to take precedence over even a starvation diet and lacking this
anabolic tissue restoring effective thyroid when when your actual metabolism is slowing
down in the thyroid deficiency the emergency stress hormones starting with adrenaline and
including cortisol rise to maintain function but at the expense of your muscles and bones
and so your even if you are eating a good diet these stress hormones can damage your
tissues make your muscles and bones atrophy leading to osteoporosis and connective tissue
diseases in which your muscles and skin and tendons ligaments all deteriorate that makes
me think about like cellulite so would low thyroid you mentioned the tissue would be
not building up the way it should so which makes me think that the tissue would then
be thinner like kind of crepey skin to where cellulite might become more prevalent would
that be the case with low thyroid the skin becomes under the high cortisol which breaks
down proteins and they aren't replaced when your thyroid is low protein synthesis is pretty
much turned off and while the skin gets thinner in the low thyroid condition estrogen is left
in an exaggeratedly active form and you retain the water but you don't retain salt in proportion
so you become waterlogged actually hypotonic relative to the normal concentration of salt
and the salt when it's retained normally under the influence of thyroid hormone the salt
associates with albumin in the blood and pulls water from the tissues into the blood stream
and delivers it to the kidneys to be excreted in low thyroid you lose the sodium in the
urine and so the albumin instead of forming a sort of a cloud in the bloodstream of ionized
sodium atoms along with the ionized albumin the albumin no longer has this osmotic ability
to retain water in the bloodstream keeping up the blood volume and keeping it out of
the tissues so the water is allowed to fall out of the blood vessels cause tissue to swell
and the albumin in the absence of sodium goes along to some extent with the water and that
becomes a viscous extra-pascular solution protein and any sodium that might be there
will form a kind of chelic like mass around cells they instead of ordinary edema in this
condition when albumin has leaked out of the blood vessels it becomes a mucous like edema
and that used to be the most common defining feature of hypothyroidism was mixed edema
or mucous like edema and this water retention in healthy relatively healthy women there's
a tendency of the estrogen at the time of ovulation to suppress thyroid function a little
bit and cause a little bit of sodium loss and a little bit of leakage of water into the
tissues but if it only goes on for a few days it doesn't become mixed edema like it's just
a passing monthly edema or swelling I think this is so important for so many people to
hear this because I don't think people think of water retention as a as a symptom of low
thyroid and so many people have that too I know you had mentioned cortisol as well as
kind of a culprit behind the issue with the water retention too and so talk to me about
how like high cortisol is that the precursor to low thyroid or does high cortisol result
from the thyroid dropping down low thyroid keeps your energy running efficiently so that
glucose is turned into carbon dioxide and you get many times more molecules of ATP to
do your work than you would if you didn't have the thyroid thyroid deficiency is like
an oxygen deficiency and you burn your sugar waste fully producing lactic acid instead
of carbon dioxide and don't produce the ATP needed to do all of the cellular work like
making protein and that means that your blood sugar becomes unstable and tends to drop sharply
with exertion as the lactic acid rises the blood sugar drops and both of those the falling
blood sugar and the rising lactic acid trigger adrenaline and cortisol and the cortisol breaks
down your protein in your tissues including muscles and connective tissues and your immune
system to produce sugar so the cortisol and the adrenaline will rise as your thyroid falls
and they will keep function going but at the expense of good structural maintenance processes
so you get a parent normal blood sugar in the normal range but at the expense of breaking
down your muscles and skin too fast makes complete sense so that that's actually the
low thyroid that actually leads to the issues with adrenaline and cortisol and so with regard
to stress what are some of the biggest stressors in our lives that might be the initial cause
of low thyroid? In the healthy person you can do an intense exercise session you can run
maybe half a block and have no production of lactic acid at all but there's a threshold
the more you use your oxygen increase your energy production rate you will find a level
at which you have used your oxygen too fast and you start producing lactic acid and the
lactic acid causes these tissue damaging cortisol increasing effects so the lactate threshold
in the good athlete is very high they can run a long distance or perform many weight
lifts before increasing the lactic acid production so that's a very safe kind of exercise activity
where you don't reach the lactate threshold but a hypothyroid person the worse your thyroid
status is the worse your oxygen metabolism is and the closer you are to the lactate threshold
until just sitting still a hypothyroid person will have increased lactic acid so when you
hyperventilate if you're a normal person sit still and breathe as fast as they can for
a minute they're going to blow out so much carbon dioxide by that over breathing but
the lack of carbon dioxide creates a hypothyroid imitating condition in which you produce lactic
acid but a person on the borderline of hypothyroidism is at rest is in effect hyperventilating they're
at their lactate threshold and then any further activity is going to just increase the lactic
acid and further increase the cortisol and destructive processes and fairly recently
people have realized that serotonin increases with a stressful exercise and it's the signal
directly that activates the pituitary gland turning on the adrenals to produce cortisol
and so the serotonin is now recognized as a signal of fatigue and also something associated
with hypothyroidism the excess pain signaling and fatigue signaling a function of serotonin
goes with hypothyroidism.
Wow so the low energy that a lot of people feel on hypothyroid if they are high low thyroid
could actually be high serotonin right?
Yeah.
That's so interesting see no one talks about serotonin being a negative you know you always
hear it being a positive and so it's neat to hear a doctor actually saying you know we
need to really be careful with how much we're elevating our serotonin.
It increases the corticotropin release hormone which then turns on ACTH which then turns
on the adrenal stress hormones and serotonin is right at the heart of our stress system.
And so with so many people running on adrenaline and high stress and they already might be
low thyroid and having this high serotonin what happens when they're running on adrenaline
you know they're not sleeping and even from my understanding low thyroid causes sleeping
issues too so when you're not sleeping what's this vicious circle here that we're talking
about?
Some of the people early sleep studies where they monitored brainwaves and could define
the different levels of sleep found that hypothyroid people never got below the second level of
sleep never reached deep recurting sleep and so hypothyroidism very often involves difficulty
getting to sleep but almost by definition it involves inadequate quality of sleep waking
up feeling unrested often with pain that are worse in the morning before any activity than
there were bedtime.
So which is hard to sleep a lot of people sleep with their cell phones right by their
head or they get up in the night if they can't sleep let's say they are low thyroid and they
flick their phone on to play games or whatever to go on Facebook or whatever and so the blue
light is blasting in their face are they doing themselves any favors as far as their thyroid
when they are exposed to EMF radiation and blue light constantly?
I think almost any stimulus but especially a random cell activating thing like a cell
phone for a few days I would get insomnia hard to go to sleep and I found that taking
a very small amount of T3 would put me right to sleep five or ten minutes after taking
10 micrograms and on one of my trips I was going to speak at a conference sponsored by
a doctor and the day before I got there I saw him and he said he hadn't slept for three
or four nights and was just in a desperate condition and I told him my experience and
gave him some 10 microgram acetamol tablets and the next day as I went to the conference
before he let me talk he pulled me aside and said that stuff is better than morphine.
And so how does that relate to the as far as like the EMF are we depleting ourselves
with constant radiation and blue light is that what we are missing out on is that conversion
to T3 is that where it's coming from?
Yeah if you keep in mind that the thyroid lets you get into the deepest layer of sleep
the muscle physiology is very analogous to the brain physiology and an old way of diagnosing
hypothyroidism was to have a person kneel on a chair so their toes hung down freely and
then something on the achilles tendon triggers a reflex of the muscle in the calf and it
makes the toes jerk out and then fall back the diagnosis of hypothyroidism is when the
relaxation phase where the toes fall back into the relaxed position is retarded so it
looks like there is a pneumatic door closure on a healthy reflex the toe jumps out and
bounces back just like a loose piece of pork chop hanging there it bounces and sways but
a hypothyroidism a person relaxes very slowly so that it comes back in little notchy movements
exactly to where it stopped and might take half a second of this slow relaxation the
brain is the same way it's very slow to relax in hypothyroidism it takes energy to relax
the muscle ATP has to be regenerated same in the brain it takes regeneration of ATP
to relax the brain and in the absence of thyroid the brain simply can't get up enough energy
to relax and go to sleep and I would say the radiation from the devices and the electromagnetic
radiation is probably blocking that as well the brain the cells are staying in a semi
excited state so they are more sensitive to any kind of stimulation and the people who
are extremely sensitive to stimulation such as a cell phone are the ones who are hypothyroid
their cells are already half stimulated they can't reach a deeply relaxed condition it
makes sense because if your body is on high alert because there is a stressor because
it's not functioning optimally because you're not functioning in an area that should be
so critical to health which is your thyroid then it's almost like the body is resistant
against shutting down or repairing or getting rid of anything it needs to get rid of in
the night toxins and repairing tissues and things like that it's just not going to do
that it's almost like it's just in survival mode is that right?
The deep sleep restores and renews everything and the cortisol increase towards dawn is
greater when your energy production from thyroid activity is impaired and so your stress starts
out at a higher level in the morning and the hypothyroid people often feel best at sunset
because the light has helped restore steroid production to some extent and lower the cortisol
so that kind of makes sense that there's so many studies on red light because red light
closely matches the light of the sunset that there are so many studies saying that red
light is actually beneficial to the thyroid.
Because the oxygen isn't withdrawing electrons the cell stays in a reductive condition too
many electrons not enough oxygen and that is coincident with the excitability for example
to glutathione in a well oxidized cell should form the disulfide bonds associating proteins
with glutathione and glutathione to some extent with itself and binding proteins into a stable
condition and when your thyroid can't withdraw the electrons completely your cell has a highly
reduced state with too much pre-reduced glutathione and if that becomes chronic this state of
chronic excitation leads to all of the degenerative diseases ultimately cancer which is an ultimate
failure of the cells to relax and reach the reparative high energy state oxidation fails
chronically in cancer cells and all of the other degenerative conditions involve some
degree of the same over reduced under oxidized energy failure process all of which would
be preventable by keeping your thyroid function proper.
You reminded me of the fact that the liver is actually really important when it comes
to the thyroid and hormone conversion and so when you said glutathione it reminded me
like we probably need to let listeners know like how important the liver is to the thyroid
can you talk about that?
In the 1940s when soldiers were coming back after being in prison camps and on a starvation
diet for a year or two many of them when they started eating enough many of them developed
breasts and this led doctors to investigate why these formerly starved soldiers suddenly
started growing breasts when they ate a good diet and they found that starvation stops
the liver from excreting estrogen same thing can happen in various liver diseases but
starvation is the basic thing that prevents the liver from detoxifying things and estrogen
is active in such extremely small amounts that it's the first thing you usually see
when the liver function slows down and when the liver is not able to attach either glucuronic
acid or sulfuric acid to the estrogen molecule letting it become water soluble and leave
the body either in the bile or urine it quickly accumulates to an excess and at the same time
the liver has started letting estrogen stay in the body the low energy is also decreasing
the ability to metabolize cholesterol and you can't make progesterone and DHEA and the
protective steroids which counteract estrogen testosterone and DHEA fall as the estrogen
increases when something has damaged its liver any kind of injury sickness or traumatic injury
that sends a man to a hospital when they give a blood test they will often find his estrogen
level is two or three times or more higher than normal even higher than the woman's normal
estrogen level just because stress of any kind is likely to stop that liver function
from getting rid of estrogen and as estrogen accumulates it blocks all of the thyroid functions
and since the thyroid is necessary to activate the liver to excrete estrogen then trauma
can set up a chronic hypothyroid state and glandular failure organ failure and so on.
This is so good and what I learned from you is that the thyroid and the liver work in
tandem together as far as the T4 to T3 conversion has to happen with the liver and only if you
have enough glycogen or you're getting enough glucose and that would stand to reason like
when you said the starvation diet is similar to what people are doing today this intermittent
fasting or days and days of fasting and they think they're doing their body a service but
really they're slowing down their thyroid or they're at least harming their conversion.
Can you talk about that?
Yeah many diet studies have found that you oxidize fat at a high rate the first in some
people the first 12 hours and some people the first 24 hours you keep oxidizing fat
when you go on a starvation diet and lose fat for maybe your first day but at some point
you have depleted your stored glycogen and that blocks the formation of the active T3
thyroid hormone and from that point on you're relying for energy to an increase extent on
the breakdown of tissue protein turning it into fat and so a more or less starvation
diet that goes on for a week or two will I think it's about 80% of your weight loss is
in the form of muscle loss and very little maybe 20% in the form of fat loss but if you
eat enough sugar and have the minerals such as in fruit and keep a slight protein intake
the small amount of sugar will prevent the breakdown of protein issues and a 10 to 14
day diet in this case will cause you to lose maybe 80% fat and only 20% muscle.
So a starvation diet after the first 12 to 24 hours is turning off your thyroid, turning
on the destructive tissue breakdown.
In one experiment people were put on a treadmill and the killed of the treadmill was adjusted
so that they kept a steady heart rate of no faster than 120 beats per minute just like
you were walking down the street and they had blood tests at intervals and almost everyone
stopped producing T3 in the first hour of that mild exercise so when your T3 is turned
off whether it's by starvation or by excess activity that's the point of which you start
breaking down protein issues.
Okay, so you heard it here folks we don't want to go without some sugar so you actually
can have sugar and actually have a really well functioning thyroid and I want to talk
about the fact that when you had mentioned that you had supplemented with T3 so obviously
and I've heard you say many times that you really feel like natural thyroid medication
would benefit most people and so I wanted you to touch on just exactly like how would
you go about telling someone to begin supplementing if they think they have low thyroid but their
doctor's not really doing anything about it.
I think everyone who thinks about that as a possibility should read Bruno Barnes' book
Hypothyroidism the Unsuspected Illness or his other book on preventing heart attacks.
In this whole career he didn't have any patient style of heart attacks or he should have had
I think he said more than a thousand from the number of patients that he had he basically
prevented all of the heart attacks in his patients by giving them an appropriate amount
of thyroid and most of his people in the long run were getting two grains of armored thyroid
he would start them on usually half a grain 30 milligrams and watch their temperature
over the first several weeks and if their temperature didn't rise to normal it would
then add another half grain and it took him typically several months to find exactly the
right dose for each patient but most of them would need around two grains.
I'm glad you mentioned temperature that's something really easy that a lot of people
listening could do is if they suspect they might have low thyroid they could take their
temperature right and that will tell them if their body is running a little cooler than
it should be that means that thyroid is not functioning right?
Yeah and Broda Barnes worked in Colorado Springs Colorado where you seldom have hot and humid
weather and one hot and humid summer in Ukraine I noticed obviously hypothyroid people coming
in with a normal temperature and I realized that a dead person in Florida can maintain
a normal temperature if the environment is at 98 degrees and humid then a potato will
maintain adequate body temperature so you have to look at other signs if the weather
is humid or if they sleep with an electric blanket or anything artificial.
So the pulse rate is another thing that helps to interpret when you're very hypothyroid
the adrenaline is the first thing to rise during the night when you use up your glycogen
and then the cortisol increases and most people have their highest cortisol at dawn because
the glycogen has been used up but if your temperature is below normal when you wake
up everyone has a lower metabolic rate during the night so it's normal to be as much as
eight tenths of a degree below normal when you wake up but it should rise right after
breakfast and stay up around 98.6 until around sunset but I saw that besides the low temperature
some people would have a very fast pulse when they first woke up because their adrenaline
was high but the cortisol hadn't risen enough to slow down the adrenaline effect and a very
fast pulse along with low temperature at waking is very common in hypothyroid people and the
pulse should slow down to normal after breakfast but where the normal thing is for the metabolic
rate to come back to normal when you eat breakfast and that brings up the pulse rate and the
temperature in healthy people but the high adrenaline can cause an artificially rapid
pulse in a hypothyroid person.
I felt that when I went through my hypothyroid spell like I remember hearing my heart beat
very fast on my pillow so if people are feeling that in the night when they're laying down
that's not normal also like cold hands and feet is not normal being cold all the time
and having to carry a sweater everywhere that's not normal so those are some things people
should watch out for yes.
So I want to touch on now the food aspect because I know at the very beginning you talked
about how PUFA polyunsaturated fats are probably the biggest culprit when it comes to why we
see so many thyroid problems but can you tell us what other than like crowding out the PUFA
is what does a healthy diet for the thyroid look like and how often should one eat you
know can you talk about the dangers of those PUFA's even in small amounts and things like
that and I've mentioned that one of the effects of high estrogen low thyroid is the loss of
sodium and when you lose sodium you increase L-basterone and L-basterone is closely connected
to parathyroid hormone which is the regulator of calcium and so if you don't eat enough
calcium you'll have high parathyroid hormone if you don't eat enough salt or can't retain
it you will have high L-basterone and stress causes you to lose both sodium and calcium
and it happens that L-basterone and parathyroid hormone both suppress mitochondrial oxidation
the same effect as not enough thyroid hormone and so the low thyroid is failing to activate
the mitochondria and its effects are increasing these two other hormones L-basterone and parathyroid
hormone which activate which block the mitochondrial respiratory enzymes turn off energy production
so that's three ways from this interaction that you're knocking out your productive use
of oxygen and glucose so getting off calcium and sodium in your diet and the only way to
tell the amount of sodium practically is whether you crave it women premenstrually very often
have intense salt cravings and I've known many who avoided salt because of medical recommendations
that eating salt raises blood pressure and so on but they would avoid salt and if anything
their water retention got worse that's because it's when you avoid salt you increase parathyroid
hormone L-basterone and parathyroid hormone and those both work with hypothyroidism to
turn off energy production so calcium is very important in a thyroid very pro-thyroid adding
salt and sea salt probably is best with all the mineral content to your diet would be
good and then crowding out the PUFA anything else like I know you're a big fan of saturated
fats too saturated fats are they avoid many of the effects inflammatory effects of the
polyunsaturated fats linoleic acid directly leads to forming arachidonic acid which its
mere presence leads to the formation of prostaglandins which have many pro-inflammatory effects including
loss of bone calcium and so the rising adrenaline when your thyroid is low rising adrenaline
liberates arachidonic acid which turns to prostaglandin which breaks down bone and makes
you lose bone tissue and turns on the parathyroid hormone.
In our schooling we were told that linoleic acid and things like arachidonic acid and
things like that that there's good prostaglandins there's bad you know there's two essential
fats that you should really have and I'm hearing you say this and it's like counterintuitive
to everything that I was told but yet yours makes so much logic sense when you when you
break it down like that it makes so much sense why we wouldn't want to have those things.
Yeah just recently people are starting to look at the consequences of having the arachidonic
acid prostaglandin rise as you accumulate fat with aging the brain gets more and more polyunsaturated
fats and they're starting to look at the role of prostaglandin in Alzheimer's disease among
other things the Alzheimer's brain has lots of spontaneous oxidation of fats into substances
called isoprostanes and neuroprostanes which are spontaneous equivalents of the enzyme
produced prostaglandins but they are made from both n-3 and n-6 fatty acids in the stressed
brain and go with our increase in Alzheimer's disease and following the idea of essential
fatty acids in the 60s people were told to eat more linoleic acid because it's an essential
fatty acid when it was found that that was increasing both cancer and heart disease as
the marketers turned to a fish oil type of n-3 but still those are accumulating in the
tissues in the blood vessels leading to plaque formation in the brain leading to various
kinds of under functioning of the brain tissue.
So you've heard it here folks you don't need to take a fish oil pill you can eat sugar
and you want to make sure that you get rid of the ones they are calling the essential
fatty acids like linoleic acid instead you can eat a really awesome pro-thyroid diet
of things like cheese and milk and good seafood and you know well cooked vegetables occasionally
and getting some good starches from your fruits yes Dr. Pete?
Yes, keeping the ratio of calcium to phosphate high enough is an important part of keeping
things in balance some Americans have five six or seven times as much phosphate in their
diet as calcium or you should have approximately equal amounts or maybe twice as much is safe
but the high phosphate turns on pro-thyroid hormone and leads to the degenerative ultimately
cancer forming processes of turning off oxidative energy and compensating with lactic acid formation.
So avoiding too much like red meat would be it would help that balance like not eating
just so much red meat and stuff like that.
Yeah, meat and beans are both very bad proteins because of their high phosphate.
Moving on to lifestyle though what are some lifestyle changes we can make in order to
improve the thyroid naturally like you mentioned the sunset you know being at the in that sunset
light is red light something that would be beneficial for us to use daily or what other
lifestyle things could we do as far as like habits we could adopt?
Being outside as much as possible it is very important but the people who work outside
ten hours a day cowboys and such have terrible skin on their face if they don't use a good
hat the sunburn does age your skin but these people have a very low incidence of internal
cancers, breast cancer, prostate cancer, bowel cancer and so on because the red light inactivates
the free radicals or active electrons reduces inflammation while maintaining good circulation.
Yeah, I have to jump in here real quick because my husband works in the outside more than
ten hours a day he owns his own lawn business and he will be glad to know that he is avoiding
cancer by doing so and he has just to give a little plug to you he follows kind of your
principles of eating and has lost 25 pounds since doing so so he enjoys his milk and orange
juice in the morning.
One of the studies in the 1960 that the oil industry doesn't like to talk about they shave
rabbits so that the sunlight hit their skin directly and they fed one the essential fatty
acids the other they gave I forget whether it was butter or coconut oil but a high saturated
fat diet and the ones on the so-called essential fatty acids the PUFA they got very wrinkly
sun damaged skin the ones on the saturated fat had good skin despite the constant sunlight
exposure.
Wow, that's fantastic for people that want to know some natural skin care they could
do they could just change the oils that they're eating from PUFA to saturated fat so that's
good to know.
As far as exercise I know you had mentioned that even that small bout of walking on a
bit of an incline actually lowered thyroid so in your opinion what would you tell someone
who is experiencing low thyroid and trying to correct it what would be the best form
of exercise to help their thyroid and what would they want to avoid?
Well having adequate carbohydrate when you set out and then again as soon as you finish
like some fruit juice and milk before and after contains maybe some salty like athletes
who take a spoonful of baking soda before exercise it's both the carbon dioxide released
from it and the sodium both of them have an anti-stress, anti-lactate effect that make
you return to normal more quickly.
That's a really good tip so even like kind of old school mentality I've heard it said
back when I was doing a lot of bodybuilding early on in 2000 it's like we always ate carbs
right before we worked out we always ate carbs right after so that kind of principle still
stands so this kind of brings me to as long as you still have a few more minutes Dr. Pete
I have two listener questions that I wanted to go to because they were kind of really
great questions.
The first one is and I guess I should ask you are you okay on time right now?
Can we keep going?
Okay great.
He says can Dr. Pete explain the connection between thyroid and the autonomic nervous
system?
You know the adrenaline connection is an important part of it.
The adrenaline compensates keeping your functions going despite being low thyroid and if you
supplement with thyroid after having been hypothyroid for a while and having very high adrenaline
your first reaction to the supplement is to have an excessively high heart rate because
the thyroid makes you sensitive to the adrenaline which is there so you experience the excess
adrenaline and it takes a while to convince your autonomic nervous system to quiet down
and let thyroid take care of it.
That usually takes a week or so to slowly increase the thyroid and reduce the excess adrenaline
but the adrenaline itself has many protective functions if you don't have tissues loaded
with polyunsaturated fats because a surge of adrenaline releases fatty acids and if
they're unsaturated they start forming these spontaneous equivalents of prostaglandins
as well as real prostaglandins and causing inflammation and degeneration.
If you release saturated fats they can't form those prodegenerative molecules.
I'm so glad you said that about the jitteriness or somebody who experiences that high adrenaline
rush after taking a natural thyroid supplement because that happened to me and I've heard
it happen to several other people and I kind of felt the same way like without knowing
I kind of felt exactly what you were saying is well I have to kind of teach my body to
get rid of this excess adrenaline and that's kind of what I portrayed to my clients is
like keep taking it your body is going to get used to the actual feeling of having an
adequate thyroid function.
Yeah that's very common and because so many doctors think of thyroid as a speed equivalent
people very often will stop using thyroid they become afraid of this overstimulated
states or they should reach the point of relaxation.
Okay so that's great to know about the autonomic nervous system so that's a great question.
The next question, the final question was can you talk about carotenemia or keratinemia
and how to resolve it when you're trying to recover the thyroid.
So I would assume this individual is talking about having kind of that yellowish skin or
having too high of carotene.
Around 1940 people who were doing surgery sometimes saw that a woman's ovaries in hypothyroidism,
the corpus luteum is named the yellow body because it normally has a yellow color.
They found that in hypothyroid women sometimes the corpus luteum was red rather than yellow
because of the beta carotene which is red having reached such a high level in hypothyroidism
and when it reaches such high levels it blocks progesterone production but leaves the accumulation
of estrogen.
So you can't produce progesterone and progesterone is needed to produce DHEA and other steroids.
The whole cholesterol conversion process goes bad when you're poisoned with keratin and
vitamin B12 is needed to break the keratin molecule into two vitamin A molecules.
So you have to make sure your vitamin B12 is adequate.
I saw one man who had a toxic level of keratin in his body and no detectable vitamin A in
his blood when he took vitamin B12, I think it was just a week and he had a reversed blood
test, high normal vitamin A and very low keratin as best as that because vitamin B12 deficiency
necessarily blocks the formation of real vitamin A and the thyroid makes you need vitamin A
because it's involved in the conversion of cholesterol to progesterone DHEA all of the
steroids and as your metabolism rises you're using your cholesterol faster to make progesterone
and that means that your cholesterol will be used, you'll cure your hypercholesterolemia
at the same time you're curing your keratinemia if your thyroid is at a proper level and you're
eating such that you have adequate vitamin B12.
That's so cool how the thyroid, you're healing the thyroid and you're healing so many other
things at the same time so I think that brings us to a good stopping point Dr. Pete and this
has been such a valuable podcast.
I think anyone and everyone will benefit from something in this podcast so you guys make
sure and share it with anybody you know that's having some thyroid issues or you know someone
that's dealing with low thyroid or hypothyroidism.
Dr. Pete, your newsletter is something all my listeners would also benefit from and the
information you keep providing and it is worth the small cost of the newsletter so I really
encourage my listeners to give back to Dr. Pete for his time and wealth of information
and purchase his newsletter so Dr. Pete can you tell them how they can do that and how
affordable it actually is?
And it is worth every penny.
I have so enjoyed them and I think all of my listeners will too and it's just a great
way to give back to you.
We so appreciate your time and your wealth of information so with that I will let you
go today and I hope you will join me again for another podcast because I have so much
more I want to ask you so thank you so much Dr. Pete.
Okay, very good.
Thank you.
Alright, thanks you guys and we'll say bye for now.
Hey out there, I'm about to drop one more bit of knowledge about why you should drop
an app off.
So I have ripped open a packet of coconut oil here but I'm not going to eat it.
I am going to use it as a little natural moisturizer so you know how when you travel you don't
want to take a whole lot especially nowadays they only let you take a carry on and if you're
just going away for the weekend and you need some moisturizer and some sunscreen to take
with you well guess what coconut oil is kind of nature's sunscreen.
So you pack one of these little bad boys with you and not only can you eat it but you can
put it on your skin and it's nature's best sunscreen because it's a natural way to protect
from the sun in a low-grade way so you can stay out all day get a little color and not
get burnt.
Also, maybe after the gym you want to moisturize and then head to work you can use this.
Maybe you need to get a little dryness out of your hair this is a wonderful way to saturate
the hair and really soothe the hair.
Pour it all over your head let it sit with a shower cap for a couple hours and then rinse
it out and wash it and you're going to have really soft silky hair and your scalp will
be soothed too.
If you have kind of itchy scalp coconut oil it's great for that.
There are so many great reasons to have a packet of coconut oil with you not just for
eating but also for body and skincare purposes.
It works great as a base oil and a body oil.
So check out dropnfbomb.com and get some of these handy dandy little packets to keep with
you even if you're not into eating it you're going to find it really beneficial to just
take on the good with you.
Oh also you can use my code GETFIT to save 20%.
Thanks for watching!
[Music]
[MUSIC PLAYING]